---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "E5: Reflecting on Assignment 2 Technical Essay"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2024-04-26
published: true
labels:
  - MIS
  - E5
  - Assignment 2
---

## Provide a brief introduction to the assignment along with a link to this page for further details:
Assignment 2 expands upon the foundation laid in Assignment 1, which primarily involved crafting a login and registration interface. These pages are pivotal as they serve as the gateway for customers post-purchase, ensuring a secure and protected e-commerce environment. 

For additional details regarding Assignment 2, kindly refer to the following link: <a href="https://dport96.github.io/ITM352/morea/150.Assignment2/experience-Assignment2.html">Assignment 2</a>.

## What did you learn from this assignment?
From this assignment, I expanded my knowledge of utilizing Node.js's file system capabilities, particularly in reading and writing data to files. An illustrative example involved adding new user information to the user_data.json file, which already contained existing user data, using fs.writeFileSync. Moreover, I acquired skills in extracting query strings and integrating them into subsequent pages, like login or registration pages. For instance, after customers selected products, the query string containing product quantities was appended to the next page. Subsequently, upon login or registration, these product quantity queries were transmitted to the invoice for generating and printing. Neglecting to attach the query string would result in the invoice failing to display the purchased products upon redirection.

## Did you work with a partner? Assign an estimated percentage on the amount each team member contributed to the assignment (including yourself).
No, I worked on Assignment 2 alone.

## How did you get help when you needed it? What did you need help with?
Whenever I encountered challenges, I sought assistance from ChatGPT or W3Shools, especially when I needed specific lines of code, like when I was unsure how to validate the password textbox to include at least one special character. Additionally, to ensure the implementability of the code generated by ChatGPT, I frequently referred to W3Schools for clarification and understanding. For more complex issues that I couldn't troubleshoot independently or with online resources, I turned to a friend for advice on how to tackle the problem or consulted Professor Port. One particularly stressful hurdle was attempting to deploy the assignment on gcloud.

## How was developing this assignment different than assignment #1?
Developing this assignment presented differences compared to Assignment 1 in several aspects. Unlike Assignment 1, where we began from scratch to build the foundation of the e-commerce site, Assignment 2 involved building upon the existing structure. Additionally, Assignment 2 required us to read and write files, which was not a focus in Assignment 1, where the emphasis was more on validations and ensuring the core functionality worked correctly.

## Estimate the % of time you spent (a) thinking about how to do something, (b) writing code (but do not include testing, (c) testing and debugging
A: 38%
B: 34%
C: 28%

## Describe what worked well with this project? What did not work well?
In this project, I found that implementing validations and utilizing if-else statements went smoothly, as I've become more accustomed to crafting such code. Designing the login and registration pages was also more straightforward this time around. I particularly enjoyed integrating CSS with the template to enhance the overall appearance. However, I encountered challenges with the server.js query string functionality. Manipulating the query string to attach to specific links proved difficult initially, as it was unfamiliar and confusing. Additionally, working with params and query strings together sometimes caused confusion, but with persistence, I managed to overcome these obstacles.

## If you could go back in time and do things differently, what would you do differently?
I wouldn't alter the choices I made throughout the project. I believe the process would have unfolded similarly regardless, with inevitable challenges along the way. Encountering these obstacles was crucial for my learning process; without them, I wouldn't have had the opportunity to troubleshoot and grow. The deployment issue, in particular, was a significant learning experience. While I wish it had been identified sooner, especially by Professor Port, it's understandable given that it was our first time using gcloud.
